Just before tea-time there came a
tremendous ring on the front-door bell, and then
he remembered! He rushed and put on the
kettle, and put out another cup and saucer, and
an extra cake or two, and ran to the door.
“I am so sorry to keep you waiting!” he was
going to say, when he saw that it was not
Gandalf at all. It was a dwarf with a blue beard
tucked into a golden belt, and very bright eyes
under his dark-green hood. As soon as the
door was opened, he pushed inside, just as if
he had been expected.
He hung his hooded cloak on the nearest
peg, and “Dwalin at your service!” he said with
a low bow.
“Bilbo Baggins at yours!” said the hobbit,
too surprised to ask any questions for the
moment. When the silence that followed had
become uncomfortable, he added: “I am just
about to take tea; pray come and have some
with me.” A little stiff perhaps, but he meant it
kindly. And what would you do, if an uninvited
dwarf came and hung his things up in your hall
without a word of explanation?
They had not been at table long, in fact they
had hardly reached the third cake, when there
came another even louder ring at the bell.
“Excuse me!” said the hobbit, and off he
went to the door.
“So you have got here at last!” That was
what he was going to say to Gandalf this time.
But it was not Gandalf. Instead there was a very
old-looking dwarf on the step with a white beard
and a scarlet hood; and he too hopped inside
as soon as the door was open, just as if he had
been invited.
“I see they have begun to arrive already,” he
said when he caught sight of Dwalin’s green
hood hanging up. He hung his red one next to it,
and “Balin at your service!” he said with his
hand on his breast.
“Thank you!” said Bilbo with a gasp. It was
not the correct thing to say, but they have
begun to arrive had flustered him badly. He
liked visitors, but he liked to know them before
they arrived, and he preferred to ask them
himself. He had a horrible thought that the
cakes might run short, and then he—as the
host: he knew his duty and stuck to it however
painful—he might have to go without.
“Come along in, and have some tea!” he
managed to say after taking a deep breath.
“A little beer would suit me better, if it is all
the same to you, my good sir,” said Balin with
the white beard. “But I don’t mind some cake—
seed-cake, if you have any.”
“Lots!” Bilbo found himself answering, to his
own surprise; and he found himself scuttling off,
too, to the cellar to fill a pint beer-mug, and then
to a pantry to fetch two beautiful round seedcakes
which he had baked that afternoon for his
after-supper morsel.
When he got back Balin and Dwalin were
talking at the table like old friends (as a matter
of fact they were brothers). Bilbo plumped down
the beer and the cake in front of them, when
loud came a ring at the bell again, and then
another ring.
“Gandalf for certain this time,” he thought as
he puffed along the passage. But it was not. It
was two more dwarves, both with blue hoods,
silver belts, and yellow beards; and each of
them carried a bag of tools and a spade. In they
hopped, as soon as the door began to open—
Bilbo was hardly surprised at all.
“What can I do for you, my dwarves?” he
said.
“Kili at your service!” said the one. “And
Fili!” added the other; and they both swept off
their blue hoods and bowed.
“At yours and your family’s!” replied Bilbo,
remembering his manners this time.
“Dwalin and Balin here already, I see,” said
Kili. “Let us join the throng!”
“Throng!” thought Mr. Baggins. “I don’t like
the sound of that. I really must sit down for a
minute and collect my wits, and have a drink.”
He had only just had a sip—in the corner, while
the four dwarves sat round the table, and talked
about mines and gold and troubles with the
goblins, and the depredations of dragons, and
lots of other things which he did not understand,
and did not want to, for they sounded much too
adventurous—when, ding-dong-a-ling-dang,
his bell rang again, as if some naughty little
hobbit-boy was trying to pull the handle off.
“Someone at the door!” he said, blinking.
“Some four, I should say by the sound,” said
Fili. “Besides, we saw them coming along
behind us in the distance.”
The poor little hobbit sat down in the hall
and put his head in his hands, and wondered
what had happened, and what was going to
happen, and whether they would all stay to
supper. Then the bell rang again louder than
ever, and he had to run to the door. It was not
four after all, it was five. Another dwarf had
come along while he was wondering in the hall.
He had hardly turned the knob, before they were
all inside, bowing and saying “at your service”
one after another. Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin, and Gloin
were their names; and very soon two purple
hoods, a grey hood, a brown hood, and a white
hood were hanging on the pegs, and off they
marched with their broad hands stuck in their
gold and silver belts to join the others. Already it
had almost become a throng. Some called for
ale, and some for porter, and one for coffee,
and all of them for cakes; so the hobbit was
kept very busy for a while.
A big jug of coffee had just been set in the
hearth, the seed-cakes were gone, and the
dwarves were starting on a round of buttered
scones, when there came—a loud knock. Not a
ring, but a hard rat-tat on the hobbit’s beautiful
green door. Somebody was banging with a
stick!Bilbo rushed along the passage, very angry,
and altogether bewildered and bewuthered—
this was the most awkward Wednesday he ever
remembered. He pulled open the door with a
jerk, and they all fell in, one on top of the other.
More dwarves, four more! And there was
Gandalf behind, leaning on his staff and
laughing. He had made quite a dent on the
beautiful door; he had also, by the way,
knocked out the secret mark that he had put
there the morning before.
“Carefully! Carefully!” he said. “It is not like
you, Bilbo, to keep friends waiting on the mat,
and then open the door like a pop-gun! Let me
introduce Bifur, Bofur, Bombur, and especially
Thorin!”
“At your service!” said Bifur, Bofur, and
Bombur standing in a row. Then they hung up
two yellow hoods and a pale green one; and
also a sky-blue one with a long silver tassel.
This last belonged to Thorin, an enormously
important dwarf, in fact no other than the great
Thorin Oakenshield himself, who was not at all
pleased at falling flat on Bilbo’s mat with Bifur,
Bofur, and Bombur on top of him. For one thing
Bombur was immensely fat and heavy. Thorin
indeed was very haughty, and said nothing
about service; but poor Mr. Baggins said he
was sorry so many times, that at last he grunted
“pray don’t mention it,” and stopped frowning.
“Now we are all here!” said Gandalf, looking
at the row of thirteen hoods—the best
detachable party hoods—and his own hat
hanging on the pegs. “Quite a merry gathering! I
hope there is something left for the late-comers
to eat and drink! What’s that? Tea! No thank
you! A little red wine, I think for me.”
“And for me,” said Thorin.
“And raspberry jam and apple-tart,” said
Bifur.
“And mince-pies and cheese,” said Bofur.
“And pork-pie and salad,” said Bombur.
“And more cakes—and ale—and coffee, if
you don’t mind,” called the other dwarves
through the door.
“Put on a few eggs, there’s a good fellow!”
Gandalf called after him, as the hobbit stumped
off to the pantries. “And just bring out the cold
chicken and pickles!”
“Seems to know as much about the inside
of my larders as I do myself!” thought Mr.
Baggins, who was feeling positively flummoxed,
and was beginning to wonder whether a most
wretched adventure had not come right into his
house. By the time he had got all the bottles and
dishes and knives and forks and glasses and
plates and spoons and things piled up on big
trays, he was getting very hot, and red in the
face, and annoyed.
“Confusticate and bebother these
dwarves!” he said aloud. “Why don’t they come
and lend a hand?” Lo and behold! there stood
Balin and Dwalin at the door of the kitchen, and
Fili and Kili behind them, and before he could
s a y knife they had whisked the trays and a
couple of small tables into the parlour and set
out everything afresh.
Gandalf sat at the head of the party with the
thirteen dwarves all round: and Bilbo sat on a
stool at the fireside, nibbling at a biscuit (his
appetite was quite taken away), and trying to
look as if this was all perfectly ordinary and not
in the least an adventure. The dwarves ate and
ate, and talked and talked, and time got on. At
last they pushed their chairs back, and Bilbo
made a move to collect the plates and glasses.
“I suppose you will all stay to supper?” he
said in his politest unpressing tones.
“Of course!” said Thorin. “And after. We
shan’t get through the business till late, and we
must have some music first. Now to clear up!”
Thereupon the twelve dwarves—not Thorin,
he was too important, and stayed talking to
Gandalf—jumped to their feet, and made tall
piles of all the things. Off they went, not waiting
for trays, balancing columns of plates, each with
a bottle on the top, with one hand, while the
hobbit ran after them almost squeaking with
fright: “please be careful!” and “please, don’t
trouble! I can manage.” But the dwarves only
started to sing:
Chip the glasses and crack the plates!
Blunt the knives and bend the forks!
That’s what Bilbo Baggins hates–
Smash the bottles and burn the corks!
Cut the cloth and tread on the fat!
Pour the milk on the pantry floor!
Leave the bones on the bedroom mat!
Splash the wine on every door!
Dump the crocks in a boiling bowl;
Pound them up with a thumping pole;
And when you’ve finished, if any are
whole,
Send them down the hall to roll!
That’s what Bilbo Baggins hates!
So, carefully! carefully with the plates!
And of course they did none of these
dreadful things, and everything was cleaned
and put away safe as quick as lightning, while
the hobbit was turning round and round in the
middle of the kitchen trying to see what they
were doing. Then they went back, and found
Thorin with his feet on the fender smoking a
pipe. He was blowing the most enormous
smoke-rings, and wherever he told one to go, it
went—up the chimney, or behind the clock on
the mantelpiece, or under the table, or round
and round the ceiling; but wherever it went it
was not quick enough to escape Gandalf. Pop!
he sent a smaller smoke-ring from his short
clay-pipe straight through each one of Thorin’s.
Then Gandalf’s smoke-ring would go green and
come back to hover over the wizard’s head. He
had a cloud of them about him already, and in
the dim light it made him look strange and
sorcerous. Bilbo stood still and watched—he
loved smoke-rings—and then he blushed to
think how proud he had been yesterday
morning of the smoke-rings he had sent up the
wind over The Hill.
“Now for some music!” said Thorin. “Bring
out the instruments!”
Kili and Fili rushed for their bags and
brought back little fiddles; Dori, Nori, and Ori
brought out flutes from somewhere inside their
coats; Bombur produced a drum from the hall;
Bifur and Bofur went out too, and came back
with clarinets that they had left among the
walking-sticks. Dwalin and Balin said: “Excuse
me, I left mine in the porch!” “Just bring mine in
with you!” said Thorin. They came back with
viols as big as themselves, and with Thorin’s
harp wrapped in a green cloth. It was a beautiful
golden harp, and when Thorin struck it the
music began all at once, so sudden and sweet
that Bilbo forgot everything else, and was swept
away into dark lands under strange moons, far
over The Water and very far from his hobbithole
under The Hill.
The dark came into the room from the little
window that opened in the side of The Hill; the
firelight flickered—it was April—and still they
played on, while the shadow of Gandalf’s beard
wagged against the wall.
The dark filled all the room, and the fire died
down, and the shadows were lost, and still they
played on. And suddenly first one and then
another began to sing as they played, deepthroated
singing of the dwarves in the deep
places of their ancient homes; and this is like a
fragment of their song, if it can be like their
song without their music.
Far over the misty mountains cold
To dungeons deep and caverns old
We must away ere break of day
To seek the pale enchanted gold.
The dwarves of yore made mighty spells,
While hammers fell like ringing bells
In places deep, where dark things sleep,
In hollow halls beneath the fells.
For ancient king and elvish lord
There many a gleaming golden hoard
They shaped and wrought, and light they
caught
To hide in gems on hilt of sword.
On silver necklaces they strung
The flowering stars, on crowns they hung
The dragon-fire, in twisted wire
They meshed the light of moon and sun.
Far over the misty mountains cold
To dungeons deep and caverns old
We must away, ere break of day,
To claim our long-forgotten gold.
Goblets they carved there for themselves
And harps of gold; where no man delves
There lay they long, and many a song
Was sung unheard by men or elves.
The pines were roaring on the height,
The winds were moaning in the night.
The fire was red, it flaming spread;
The trees like torches blazed with light.
The bells were ringing in the dale
And men looked up with faces pale;
The dragon’s ire more fierce than fire
Laid low their towers and houses frail.
The mountain smoked beneath the
moon;
The dwarves, they heard the tramp of
doom.
They fled their hall to dying fall
Beneath his feet, beneath the moon.
Far over the misty mountains grim
To dungeons deep and caverns dim
We must away, ere break of day,
To win our harps and gold from him!
As they sang the hobbit felt the love of
beautiful things made by hands and by cunning
and by magic moving through him, a fierce and
a jealous love, the desire of the hearts of
dwarves. Then something Tookish woke up
inside him, and he wished to go and see the
great mountains, and hear the pine-trees and
the waterfalls, and explore the caves, and wear
a sword instead of a walking-stick. He looked
out of the window. The stars were out in a dark
sky above the trees. He thought of the jewels of
the dwarves shining in dark caverns. Suddenly
in the wood beyond The Water a flame leapt up
—probably somebody lighting a wood-fire—
and he thought of plundering dragons settling
on his quiet Hill and kindling it all to flames. He
shuddered; and very quickly he was plain Mr.
Baggins of Bag-End, Under-Hill, again.
He got up trembling. He had less than half a
mind to fetch the lamp, and more than half a
mind to pretend to, and go and hide behind the
beer-barrels in the cellar, and not come out
again until all the dwarves had gone away.
Suddenly he found that the music and the
singing had stopped, and they were all looking
at him with eyes shining in the dark.
“Where are you going?” said Thorin, in a
tone that seemed to show that he guessed both
halves of the hobbit’s mind.
“What about a little light?” said Bilbo
apologetically.
“We like the dark,” said all the dwarves.
“Dark for dark business! There are many hours
before dawn.”
“Of course!” said Bilbo, and sat down in a
hurry. He missed the stool and sat in the fender,
knocking over the poker and shovel with a
crash.
“Hush!” said Gandalf. “Let Thorin speak!”
And this is how Thorin began.
“Gandalf, dwarves and Mr. Baggins! We
are met together in the house of our friend and
fellow conspirator, this most excellent and
audacious hobbit—may the hair on his toes
never fall out! all praise to his wine and ale!—”
He paused for breath and for a polite remark
from the hobbit, but the compliments were quite
lost on poor Bilbo Baggins, who was wagging
his mouth in protest at being called audacious
and worst of all fellow conspirator, though no
noise came out, he was so flummoxed. So
Thorin went on:
“We are met to discuss our plans, our ways,
means, policy and devices. We shall soon
before the break of day start on our long
journey, a journey from which some of us, or
perhaps all of us (except our friend and
counsellor, the ingenious wizard Gandalf) may
never return. It is a solemn moment. Our object
is, I take it, well known to us all. To the
estimable Mr. Baggins, and perhaps to one or
two of the younger dwarves (I think I should be
right in naming Kili and Fili, for instance), the
exact situation at the moment may require a
little brief explanation—”